---
title: promethues
---

DATA MODEL
Prometheus fundamentally stores all data as time series: streams of timestamped values belonging to the same metric and the same set of labeled dimensions. Besides stored time series, Prometheus may generate temporary derived time series as the result of queries.
Every time series is uniquely identified by its metric name and optional key-value pairs called labels. The metric name specifies the general feature of a system that is measured (e.g. http_requests_total - the total number of HTTP requests received). It may contain ASCII letters and digits, as well as underscores and colons. It must match the regex [a-zA-Z_:][a-zA-Z0-9_:]*. Note: The colons are reserved for user defined recording rules. They should not be used by exporters or direct instrumentation. Labels enable Prometheus's dimensional data model: any given combination of labels for the same metric name identifies a particular dimensional instantiation of that metric (for example: all HTTP requests that used the method POST to the /api/tracks handler). The query language allows filtering and aggregation based on these dimensions. Changing any label value, including adding or removing a label, will create a new time series. Label names may contain ASCII letters, numbers, as well as underscores. They must match the regex [a-zA-Z_][a-zA-Z0-9_]*. Label names beginning with __ are reserved for internal use. Label values may contain any Unicode characters. A label with an empty label value is considered equivalent to a label that does not exist.

QUERYING PROMETHEUS
Prometheus provides a functional query language called PromQL (Prometheus Query Language) that lets the user select and aggregate time series data in real time. The result of an expression can either be shown as a graph, viewed as tabular data in Prometheus's expression browser, or consumed by external systems via the HTTP API.
In Prometheus's expression language, an expression or sub-expression can evaluate to one of four types: Instant vector - a set of time series containing a single sample for each time series, all sharing the same timestamp Range vector - a set of time series containing a range of data points over time for each time series Scalar - a simple numeric floating point value String - a simple string value; currently unused Depending on the use-case (e.g. when graphing vs. displaying the output of an expression), only some of these types are legal as the result from a user-specified expression. For example, an expression that returns an instant vector is the only type that can be directly graphed.
